# Contemporary Issues In Data


# Palantir's involvement in the response of international governments'  to the COVID 19 crisis. 
In this document, I discuss two articles about Palantir's mining of patient data as a tool to guide governments' response to the coronavirus pandemic; the benefits and risks of doing so and the reception of such attempts  I present and discuss two opposing views on this important matter.

## Article 1
NPR's [Palantir’s New ‘Driving Thrust’: Predicting Coronavirus Outbreaks](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-04-02/coronavirus-news-palantir-gives-away-data-mining-tools), explores the ways in which Palantir Technologies, a now public American software company with a focus in Data Analytics, is able to help governments across the globe approach the coronavirus crisis. The company is said to be capitalizing on its data mining capabilities to guide officials formulate a response, by properly allocating medical expertise and supplies to outbreak sites. Foundry, the company’s software specifically geared for government related applications, at the time of the article writing, had been used in such efforts by the U.S and the U.K , as well as countries such Austria, Canada, Spain and Greece.

Founded right after 9/11, Palantir is said to have a record in responding to crises. The CDC has previously relied on Palantir’s software to alleviate other emergencies, such as food contagions and vaping. Capitalizing on anonymized personal patient data, such as gender, age group, zip code and health status, the article claims the company was able to set up a real-time framework through which Americans can view infection rates and gain access to testing when appropriate. The article is arguing that through the company's predictive analytics techniques, the US government will be better able to detect expected hotspots and address their needs more efficiently. In the European context things are a bit more restricted. The legal framework set in the EU by the General Data Protection Regulation Laws which prioritizes data privacy, makes the use of location data a point of contention.


## Article 2
Contrary to the claims made in NPR's piece on the issue, ComputerWeekly's [Privacy advocates call for European probe into Palantir](https://www.computerweekly.com/news/252492146/Privacy-advocates-call-for-European-probe-into-Palantir) examines the controversy surrounding privacy concerns raised by a plethora of European countries. SOMI, a Dutch non-profit privacy group is said to call for a thorough investigation of Palantir’s practices within Europe, pertaining around data privacy and securitization. The organization pointed to Palantir’s close connection to the US government and intelligence agencies as a potential risk factor, highlighting the aura of mystery and opacity of communications amongst European leadership and the company. The organization is said to  be probed to this action in an effort to protect the “integrity of EU surveillance operations”, while avoiding it potentially being “compromised by un(known) non-European entities”

The company’s success, the article claims, comes from their ability to utilize seemingly disconnected and otherwise meaningless information, combining them in such a way to reach a unexpected and noteworthy conclusions. However, in order to do so the company capitalizes on various databases it has access to; these databases are what is now under question. When it comes to citizens’ data, issues such as privacy, civil liberty and transparency of government may be prioritized. Shifting the focus on the technological independence of the EU might be a more important strategic step towards defending the unions future informational security.